README.md, before:

# SQL Upload Generator

supplement to WeeWX skins to use the database on the web server for
uninterrupted availability of the web pages

## Why use SQLupload?

You sure experienced this situation: You accessed your weather website,
and you got an incomplete or defective result, or even a 403 or 404
error message. Some seconds later, when you press "reload", all is perfect 
again.

What is the reason for that behavior?

At the end of the archive interval - typically every 5 minutes - WeeWX
newly creates the web pages and uploads them to the web server. While
the file is written, it is incomplete on the server. If you then access
it at the same time, you get a page that looks damaged or no page at
all. This happens more often than you would guess.

To prevent this you could use `rsync`, but unfortunately this is not 
available with all web space providers. On the other hand, all of them 
provide databases. So, what about uploading the web pages using such a 
database?

This extension tries to do so. Put it between the skin configuration and the
FTP uploader configuration in `weewx.conf`. It then uploads the data
to the database and replaces the original files by PHP scripts that
query the database for the content and deliver it to the
user. Links are adjusted automatically.

So no changes to the original skin are required. It's simple. See 
[here](#simple-configuration-for-use-together-with-the-built-in-seasons-skin)
how to use it for the WeeWX built-in **Seasons skin**.

The content of the PHP files does not change between consecutive report
creation cycles. And the original WeeWX FTP uploader does not upload
files that did not change. So there is always a valid web file on the
server now with no interruption any more.

## Prerequisites

You need the Python MySQL client module.

## Installation instructions

1) download

   ```
   wget -O weewx-sqlupload.zip https://github.com/roe-dl/weewx-sqlupload/archive/master.zip
   ```

2) run the installer

   WeeWX up to version 4.X

   ```shell
   sudo wee_extension --install weewx-sqlupload.zip
   ```

   WeeWX from version 5.0 on and WeeWX packet installation

   ```shell
   sudo weectl extension install weewx-sqlupload.zip
   ```

   WeeWX from version 5.0 on and WeeWX pip installation into an virtual environment

   ```shell
   source ~/weewx-venv/bin/activate
   weectl extension install weewx-sqlupload.zip
   ```
   
3) edit configuration in `weewx.conf`

   See section [Configuration instructions](#configuration-instructions)

5) restart weewx

   for SysVinit systems:

   ```shell
   sudo /etc/init.d/weewx stop
   sudo /etc/init.d/weewx start
   ```

   for systemd systems:

   ```shell
   sudo systemctl stop weewx
   sudo systemctl start weewx
   ```

## Configuration instructions

You can add the configuration either to `weewx.conf` or `skin.conf`.

In `weewx.conf` it looks like that:
```
...
[StdReport]
    ...
    [[SQLupload]]
        enable = true
        skin = SQLupload
        host = replace_me
        username = replace_me
        password = replace_me
        database_name = replace_me
        table_name = replace_me
        [[[SQLuploadGenerator]]]
            #actions = sqlupload, writephp, adjustlinks
            #html_divide_tag = html
            #preserve_file_name_extension = false
            #replace_links_to_this_file = true
            #merge_skin = replace_me
            [[[[home-page]]]]
                file = index.html
                #actions = sqlupload, writephp, adjustlinks
                #html_divide_tag = html
                #preserve_file_name_extension = false
                #replace_links_to_this_file = true
            [[[[other-page]]]]
                file = subdirectory/file.ext
                #actions = sqlupload, writephp, adjustlinks
                #preserve_file_name_extension = false
                #replace_links_to_this_file = true
            ...
    [[FTP]]
        ...
...
```

* `php_mysql_driver`: PHP MySQL driver to use, either `pdo` or `mysqli`,
  optional, default `pdo` if omitted
* `merge_skin`: If this key points to a valid skin, its `skin.conf` file is
  searched for templates, and SQLupload entries are created for each of them
  and merged into the configuration. If a section of the same name exists
  in both the skin and the SQLupload configuration, the SQLupload section 
  takes precedence over the skin section.
* `file`: file name and path of the file to upload to the database
* `actions`: a comma-separated list of actions to perform:
  * `sqlupload`: upload the file to the database. In case of HTML divide
    it into a constant and a variable part as defined by the 
    `html_divide_tag` key and upload the variable part only.
  * `writephp`: replace the original file by a PHP script. In case of HTML,
    this PHP script includes the constant part. The PHP is then uploaded
    by FTP together with the other constant files of the skin. Its 
    purpose is to query the database and to deliver the content of the
    file it replaced.
  * `adjustlinks`: adjust the links to other files to reflect the change
    of their file name extension. Effective only for HTML and JavaScript
    files. This can be the only option (or combined with `noremove`) in 
    case of static files that are to upload by FTP later.
  * `noremove`: do not remove the original file after upload in order to
    upload it by FTP, too. Not for general use. Not together with
    `writephp`.
  The default is `sqlupload, writephp, adjustlinks` if omitted.
* `html_divide_tag`: tag, which surrounds the variable part of the page, for
  example `html` or `body`. If the value is `none`, the whole file is
  uploaded to the database. Effective only for HTML files.
* `preserve_file_name_extension`: preserve the original file name extension 
  while writing the PHP script. Together with action `writephp` only. 
  If you use this option you need special settings within the web server
  configuration to enable PHP for file name extensions other than
  `.php`.
* `replace_links_to_this_file`: if true (which is the default) adjust all 
  the links to this file within other files 
* `first_run_only`: process this entry in the first run after the WeeWX
  start only, optional, default is to process it every report creation
  cycle. Use this option for files that are listed in the value of the
  `copy_once` key of the skin and contain links or references to targets 
  that are subject to the `writephp` action.

### Simple configuration for use together with the WeeWX built-in Seasons skin

1. Activate the database at you web spcace
2. Insert the SQLupload configuration to `weewx.conf`

   ```
   ...
   [StdReport]
       ...
       [[SeasonsReport]]
           ...
       ...
       [[SQLupload]]
           enable = true
           skin = SQLupload
           host = replace_me
           username = replace_me
           password = replace_me
           database_name = replace_me
           table_name = seasons
           [[[SQLuploadGenerator]]]
               merge_skin = SeasonsReport
               [[[[seasons.js]]]]
                   actions = adjustlinks
                   first_run_only = true
       [[FTP]]
           ...
   ```

3. Restart WeeWX as described above
4. Remove `.html` and `.png` files from both the `HTML_ROOT` directory and
   the web space
5. Wait for the next report creation cycle to take place
6. If you then enter the URL of your web server into the browser, the web
   server delivers `index.php` instead of former `index.html` automatically
   and displays the skin as before.

## How to enable PHP on the web server?

This is not about configuring PHP or web servers in general. This is
about the special requirements of this extension only.

### File name extension `.php`

If the file name ends with `.php` the server processes PHP automatically. 
So the easiest way is to let this extension rename all the non-static 
`.html` files to `.php` and replace the internal links as well. This is 
the default behavior if you do not set special options.

If you want to reference the file or page by the original name irrespective
of the name change, you can set up a re-write rule in `.htacces`. It could
look like that:

```
RewriteCond %{REQUEST_URI} "=/path/on/server/file.ext"
RewriteRule "^(.*).html$" "$1.php" [L]
```

Or to generally deliver the `.php` files if `.html` is requested:

```
RewriteCond   "$1.php"           -f
RewriteCond   "$1.html"          !-f
RewriteRule   "^(.*).html$"      "$1.php"
```

Source: [Redirecting and Remapping with mod_rewrite, Backward Compatibility](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/trunk/rewrite/remapping.html#backward-compatibility)

### Preserving the original file name extension

If you set `preserve_file_name_extension` to `true` (either globally or by 
file), the original file name extension is not changed. In this case you have 
to enable PHP within the web server configuration. 

You could do so by putting this into `.htaccess`:
```
RewriteEngine On
RewriteCond %{REQUEST_URI} "=/path/on/server/file.ext"
RewriteRule ".*" "-" [H=application/x-httpd-php]
```

This may work or not, depending on the general configuration of the web
server. To check you can save the following code as `test.html` and
`test.php` to your web space and compare the result:

```php
<?php
  phpinfo();
?>
```

If you open those files in your web server you see a long table of
configuration data. If you see the text above only, PHP is not enabled. If
you get a different output from `test.html` and `test.php` the web server is
probably not configured to process PHP within files with file name extension
`.html`. You may ask your web space provider to adjust the configuration.
Especially look at the item "Additional .ini files parsed".

## What finally happens

### HTML files

First the file is divided into two parts at the tag specified by
`html_divide_tag`. The inner part is extracted and uploaded to the database. 
Where the inner part was within the outer part, PHP code to query the 
database is included. The original file is replaced by the outer part with
the PHP code inserted. 

If `preserve_file_name_extension` is not set, the file name extension is 
replaced with `.php` and if `replace_links_to_this_file` is set as well, 
all internal links are adjusted to the new name.

When the user's browser requests the page, the server processes the PHP code 
and so merges the inner part into the outer part. The browser does not see
anything of that dividing and merging.

### JavaScript files

JavaScript code can contain references to other files. So the file is
searched for such references, and they are adjusted appropriately.
In a typical configuration the file is changed in place and uploaded
by FTP later. No database upload is performed for those files. It
is not necessary because they do not change regularly.

### Other files

The file is uploaded to the database. If `writephp` is set (which is the
default), the file is replaced by a file containing PHP code to query the
database. The FTP uploader then uploads the replacement file. As the content 
of that file does not change between consecutive report cycles, the FTP 
uploader does not upload the file again.

When the user's browser requests the file, the server processes the PHP code, 
queries the database for the original file and delivers it to the browser.

## Troubleshooting

* See the syslog for messages containing `user.sqlupload`. They may reveal 
  some reason for problems.
* To get more details in logging set `debug = 1` in `weewx.conf` and restart
  WeeWX
* Don't forget to remove all the files that are uploaded before setting up
  the SQLupload extension at both the `HTML_ROOT` directory and the
  web space.
* Make sure the SQLupload configuration section is placed before the FTP
  section but after the skin section in `weewx.conf`.
* Make sure `HTML_ROOT` points to the same directory in the skin
  configuration, the SQLupload configuration, and the FTP upload 
  configuration.
* Your web space provider may require you to create the database at their
  administration portal.
* There are different PHP MySQL drivers. If you encounter error messages
  about unsuccessful database access in the browser, try another driver
  by setting `php_mysql_driver` to `mysqli` or `pdo`, respectively.

## Links

* [Apache Module mod_rewrite](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/mod/mod_rewrite.html)
* [Apache Redirecting and Remapping with mod_rewrite](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/trunk/rewrite/remapping.html)
* [weewx-user: Page not found or empty](https://groups.google.com/g/weewx-user/c/Ioykua7OJm0/m/EYtd_UTMAwAJ)
* [weewx-user: FTP upload and web page display errors](https://groups.google.com/g/weewx-user/c/TLard6hoKxw)
* [SFTP uploader weewx-sftp](https://github.com/matthewwall/weewx-sftp)
* [WeeWX](https://weewx.com)

Commit message:

fix handle_charref(), BLOB replaced with LONGBLOB, comments in JavaScript, Belchertown support

README.md, after:

# SQL Upload Generator

supplement to WeeWX skins to use the database on the web server for
uninterrupted availability of the web pages

## Why use SQLupload?

You sure experienced this situation: You accessed your weather website,
and you got an incomplete or defective result, or even a 403 or 404
error message. Some seconds later, when you press "reload", all is perfect 
again.

What is the reason for that behavior?

At the end of the archive interval - typically every 5 minutes - WeeWX
newly creates the web pages and uploads them to the web server. While
the file is written, it is incomplete on the server. If you then access
it at the same time, you get a page that looks damaged or no page at
all. This happens more often than you would guess.

To prevent this you could use `rsync`, but unfortunately this is not 
available with all web space providers. On the other hand, all of them 
provide databases. So, what about uploading the web pages using such a 
database?

This extension tries to do so. Put it between the skin configuration and the
FTP uploader configuration in `weewx.conf`. It then uploads the data
to the database and replaces the original files by PHP scripts that
query the database for the content and deliver it to the
user. Links are adjusted automatically.

So generally no changes to the original skin are required. It's simple. See 
[here](#simple-configuration-for-use-together-with-the-built-in-seasons-skin)
how to use it for the WeeWX built-in **Seasons skin**.

The content of the PHP files does not change between consecutive report
creation cycles. And the original WeeWX FTP uploader does not upload
files that did not change. So there is always a valid web file on the
server now with no interruption any more.

## Prerequisites

You need the Python MySQL client module.

## Installation instructions

1) download

   ```
   wget -O weewx-sqlupload.zip https://github.com/roe-dl/weewx-sqlupload/archive/master.zip
   ```

2) run the installer

   WeeWX up to version 4.X

   ```shell
   sudo wee_extension --install weewx-sqlupload.zip
   ```

   WeeWX from version 5.0 on and WeeWX packet installation

   ```shell
   sudo weectl extension install weewx-sqlupload.zip
   ```

   WeeWX from version 5.0 on and WeeWX pip installation into an virtual environment

   ```shell
   source ~/weewx-venv/bin/activate
   weectl extension install weewx-sqlupload.zip
   ```
   
3) edit configuration in `weewx.conf`

   See section [Configuration instructions](#configuration-instructions)

5) restart weewx

   for SysVinit systems:

   ```shell
   sudo /etc/init.d/weewx stop
   sudo /etc/init.d/weewx start
   ```

   for systemd systems:

   ```shell
   sudo systemctl stop weewx
   sudo systemctl start weewx
   ```

## Configuration instructions

You can add the configuration either to `weewx.conf` or `skin.conf`.

In `weewx.conf` it looks like that:
```
...
[StdReport]
    ...
    [[SQLupload]]
        enable = true
        skin = SQLupload
        host = replace_me
        username = replace_me
        password = replace_me
        database_name = replace_me
        table_name = replace_me
        [[[SQLuploadGenerator]]]
            #actions = sqlupload, writephp, adjustlinks
            #html_divide_tag = html
            #preserve_file_name_extension = false
            #replace_links_to_this_file = true
            #merge_skin = replace_me
            [[[[home-page]]]]
                file = index.html
                #actions = sqlupload, writephp, adjustlinks
                #html_divide_tag = html
                #preserve_file_name_extension = false
                #replace_links_to_this_file = true
            [[[[other-page]]]]
                file = subdirectory/file.ext
                #actions = sqlupload, writephp, adjustlinks
                #preserve_file_name_extension = false
                #replace_links_to_this_file = true
            ...
    [[FTP]]
        ...
...
```

Options for general use:
* `merge_skin`: If this key points to a valid skin, its `skin.conf` file is
  searched for templates, and SQLupload entries are created for each of them
  and merged into the configuration. If a section of the same name exists
  in both the skin and the SQLupload configuration, the SQLupload section 
  takes precedence over the skin section.
* `file`: file name and path of the file to upload to the database
* `actions`: a comma-separated list of actions to perform:
  * `sqlupload`: upload the file to the database. In case of HTML divide
    it into a constant and a variable part as defined by the 
    `html_divide_tag` key and upload the variable part only.
  * `writephp`: replace the original file by a PHP script. In case of HTML,
    this PHP script includes the constant part. The PHP is then uploaded
    by FTP together with the other constant files of the skin. Its 
    purpose is to query the database and to deliver the content of the
    file it replaced.
  * `adjustlinks`: adjust the links to other files to reflect the change
    of their file name extension. Effective only for HTML and JavaScript
    files. This can be the only option (or combined with `noremove`) in 
    case of static files that are to upload by FTP later.
  * `noremove`: do not remove the original file after upload in order to
    upload it by FTP, too. Not for general use. Not together with
    `writephp`.
  The default is `sqlupload, writephp, adjustlinks` if omitted.
* `html_divide_tag`: tag, which surrounds the variable part of the page, for
  example `html` or `body`. If the value is `none`, the whole file is
  uploaded to the database. Effective only for HTML files.
* `preserve_file_name_extension`: preserve the original file name extension 
  while writing the PHP script. Together with action `writephp` only. 
  If you use this option you need special settings within the web server
  configuration to enable PHP for file name extensions other than
  `.php`.
* `replace_links_to_this_file`: if true (which is the default) adjust all 
  the links to this file within other files 
* `first_run_only`: process this entry in the first run after the WeeWX
  start only, optional, default is to process it every report creation
  cycle. Use this option for files that are listed in the value of the
  `copy_once` key of the skin and contain links or references to targets 
  that are subject to the `writephp` action.

Options in case of trouble:
* `php_mysql_driver`: PHP MySQL driver to use, either `pdo` or `mysqli`,
  optional, default `pdo` if omitted
* `sql_data_type`: data type of the database column that holds the 
  web page data, optional, default `LONGBLOB`

### Simple configuration for use together with the WeeWX built-in Seasons skin

1. Activate the database at you web spcace
2. Insert the SQLupload configuration to `weewx.conf`

   ```
   ...
   [StdReport]
       ...
       [[SeasonsReport]]
           ...
       ...
       [[SQLupload]]
           enable = true
           skin = SQLupload
           host = replace_me
           username = replace_me
           password = replace_me
           database_name = replace_me
           table_name = seasons
           [[[SQLuploadGenerator]]]
               merge_skin = SeasonsReport
               [[[[seasons.js]]]]
                   actions = adjustlinks
                   first_run_only = true
       [[FTP]]
           ...
   ```

3. Restart WeeWX as described above
4. Remove `.html` and `.png` files from both the `HTML_ROOT` directory and
   the web space
5. Wait for the next report creation cycle to take place
6. If you then enter the URL of your web server into the browser, the web
   server delivers `index.php` instead of former `index.html` automatically
   and displays the skin as before.

## How to enable PHP on the web server?

This is not about configuring PHP or web servers in general. This is
about the special requirements of this extension only.

### File name extension `.php`

If the file name ends with `.php` the server processes PHP automatically. 
So the easiest way is to let this extension rename all the non-static 
`.html` files to `.php` and replace the internal links as well. This is 
the default behavior if you do not set special options.

If you want to reference the file or page by the original name irrespective
of the name change, you can set up a re-write rule in `.htacces`. It could
look like that:

```
RewriteCond %{REQUEST_URI} "=/path/on/server/file.ext"
RewriteRule "^(.*).html$" "$1.php" [L]
```

Or to generally deliver the `.php` files if `.html` is requested:

```
RewriteCond   "$1.php"           -f
RewriteCond   "$1.html"          !-f
RewriteRule   "^(.*).html$"      "$1.php"
```

Source: [Redirecting and Remapping with mod_rewrite, Backward Compatibility](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/trunk/rewrite/remapping.html#backward-compatibility)

### Preserving the original file name extension

If you set `preserve_file_name_extension` to `true` (either globally or by 
file), the original file name extension is not changed. In this case you have 
to enable PHP within the web server configuration. 

You could do so by putting this into `.htaccess`:
```
RewriteEngine On
RewriteCond %{REQUEST_URI} "=/path/on/server/file.ext"
RewriteRule ".*" "-" [H=application/x-httpd-php]
```

This may work or not, depending on the general configuration of the web
server. To check you can save the following code as `test.html` and
`test.php` to your web space and compare the result:

```php
<?php
  phpinfo();
?>
```

If you open those files in your web server you see a long table of
configuration data. If you see the text above only, PHP is not enabled. If
you get a different output from `test.html` and `test.php` the web server is
probably not configured to process PHP within files with file name extension
`.html`. You may ask your web space provider to adjust the configuration.
Especially look at the item "Additional .ini files parsed".

## What finally happens

### HTML files

First the file is divided into two parts at the tag specified by
`html_divide_tag`. The inner part is extracted and uploaded to the database. 
Where the inner part was within the outer part, PHP code to query the 
database is included. The original file is replaced by the outer part with
the PHP code inserted. 

If `preserve_file_name_extension` is not set, the file name extension is 
replaced with `.php` and if `replace_links_to_this_file` is set as well, 
all internal links are adjusted to the new name.

When the user's browser requests the page, the server processes the PHP code 
and so merges the inner part into the outer part. The browser does not see
anything of that dividing and merging.

### JavaScript files

JavaScript code can contain references to other files. So the file is
searched for such references, and they are adjusted appropriately.
In a typical configuration the file is changed in place and uploaded
by FTP later. No database upload is performed for those files. It
is not necessary because they do not change regularly.

The Belchertown skin uses a special regular expression to get
the relative paths of its web pages. This WeeWX extension knows about
it and adjusts it to make it working with `.php` files, too.

### Other files

The file is uploaded to the database. If `writephp` is set (which is the
default), the file is replaced by a file containing PHP code to query the
database. The FTP uploader then uploads the replacement file. As the content 
of that file does not change between consecutive report cycles, the FTP 
uploader does not upload the file again.

When the user's browser requests the file, the server processes the PHP code, 
queries the database for the original file and delivers it to the browser.

## Troubleshooting

* See the syslog for messages containing `user.sqlupload`. They may reveal 
  some reason for problems.
* To get more details in logging set `debug = 1` in `weewx.conf` and restart
  WeeWX
* Don't forget to remove all the files that are uploaded before setting up
  the SQLupload extension at both the `HTML_ROOT` directory and the
  web space.
* Make sure the SQLupload configuration section is placed before the FTP
  section but after the skin section in `weewx.conf`.
* Make sure `HTML_ROOT` points to the same directory in the skin
  configuration, the SQLupload configuration, and the FTP upload 
  configuration.
* Your web space provider may require you to create the database at their
  administration portal.
* There are different PHP MySQL drivers. If you encounter error messages
  about unsuccessful database access in the browser, try another driver
  by setting `php_mysql_driver` to `mysqli` or `pdo`, respectively.

## Links

* [Apache Module mod_rewrite](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/mod/mod_rewrite.html)
* [Apache Redirecting and Remapping with mod_rewrite](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/trunk/rewrite/remapping.html)
* [weewx-user: Page not found or empty](https://groups.google.com/g/weewx-user/c/Ioykua7OJm0/m/EYtd_UTMAwAJ)
* [weewx-user: FTP upload and web page display errors](https://groups.google.com/g/weewx-user/c/TLard6hoKxw)
* [SFTP uploader weewx-sftp](https://github.com/matthewwall/weewx-sftp)
* [WeeWX](https://weewx.com)
